Topological excitations require non-trivial topological structure of the configuration space, thus a spontaneous symmetry breaking and thus the system to be in the ordered phase. If an excitation is created from vacuum by
$$
|\mu\rangle=\mu({\bf r},r)|0\rangle
$$
so it should be orthogonal to the vacuum, $\langle 0|\mu\rangle=\langle\mu\rangle=0$ and $\langle\mu\rangle$ can be treated as a disorder parameter - an opposite of the order parameter:
$$
\langle\phi\rangle\neq0\Rightarrow\langle\mu\rangle=0,
$$
$$
\langle\mu\rangle\neq0\Rightarrow\langle\phi\rangle=0.
$$
If the system is invariant under the operation of a group element $g$ acting on a basic field $\phi$,
$$
\phi\rightarrow U\phi U^\dagger=\g\circ\phi,
$$
then the **dual algebra** in $d=1$ is
$$
\mu(x,t)\phi(y,t)=\left\lbrace
\begin{matrix}
[g\circ\phi](y,t)\mu(x,t), & y>x \\
\phi(y,t)\mu(x,t),         & y<x
\end{matrix}
\right.
$$
For $d>1$, it also depends on the $T(S)$ region around $\bf x$ enclosed by a surface $S_{d-1}$, inside which there is a trivial vacuum,
$$
\mu(x,t)\phi(x,t)=\left\lbrace
\begin{matrix}
[g\circ\phi]({\bf y},t)\mu({\bf x},t,T(S)), & {\bf y}\notin T(S) \\
\phi({\bf y},t)\mu({\bf x},t),              & {\bf y}\in T(S)
\end{matrix}
\right.
$$
A local limit amounts to shrinking $T(S)$ to a point.
Köberle-Marino-Swieca theorem states that for operators satisfying the dual algebra:
1. $\langle\mu\rangle\langle\phi\rangle=0$
2. $\langle\mu({\bf x}t)\phi({\bf y},t)=0$
3. the mass gap vanishes if both $\langle\mu\rangle=0$ and $\langle\phi\rangle=0$.
#### Example for the Ising model
1D Ising model has a Hamiltonian
$$
H=-J\sum\sigma_3(n)\sigma_3(n+1)
$$
invariant under $\sigma_3(n)\rightarrow-\sigma_3(n)$ for all $n$.
Introducing a dual lattice with point $n^*$ right between $n$ and $n+1$, one can define a dual algebra
$$
\mu(n^*)\sigma_3(m)=\left\lbrace
\begin{matrix}
-\sigma_3(m)\mu(n^*), & m>n \\
-\sigma_3(m)\mu(n^*),         & m\leq n
\end{matrix}
\right.
$$
It is satisfied by the operator
$$
\mu(n^*)=\prod_{m>n}\sigma_1(m)
$$
It flips all the spins from $n+1$ onwards. It does not change the unordered state. For one of the two degenerate vacua (all spins up or all spins down), the operator creates a **Bloch wall**.

Classical 2D Ising model, corresponding to a quantum 1D one, is described by the Hamiltonian
$$
H=-J\sum_{\langle nm\rangle}\sigma(n)\sigma(m).
$$
Points of the dual lattice $n^*$ are located in centres of plaquettes of the original lattice. Classical order variables $\mu(n^*)=\pm1$ are introduced on them. A statistical correlation fucntion is then defined as:
$$
\langle\mu(n^*)\mu(m^*)\rangle=\sum_{\lbrace\sigma\rbrace}e^{-H_C[\sigma]},
$$
where the sum runs over spin configurations, and $H_C[\sigma]$ is given by $H[\sigma]$ except that the sign of the coupling $J$ is flipped along and arbitrary path $C$ connecting sites $m^*$ and $n^*$, which crosses links connecting nearest neighbours of the original lattice. One can thus write
$$
H_C[\sigma]=H[\sigma]\;\;\;\mathrm{if}\;\langle ij\rangle\notin C
$$
$$
H_C[\sigma]=-H[\sigma]\;\;\;\mathrm{if}\;\langle ij\rangle\in C
$$
It is invariant under the choice of the curve. It can be shown by changing summation variables $\sigma(n)\rightarrow-\sigma(n)$ inside a region bounded by a closed curve $\Gamma=C-C'$. The sum is invariant under such change, therefore
$$
\langle\mu(n^*)\mu(m^*)\rangle_C=\langle\mu(n^*)\mu(m^*)\rangle_{C'}.
$$
In contrast, mixed correlation functions:
$$
\langle\mu(n^*_1)\sigma(m_1)\mu(n^*_2)\sigma(m_2)=
\sum_{\lbrace\sigma\rbrace}e^{-H_C[\sigma]}\sigma(m_1)\sigma(m_1)
$$
posses a sign ambiguity depending whether $m_1$ or $m_1$ or both belong to the region encircled by the closed curve $\Gamma$. This is a manifestation of the dual algebra.
#### Generalised statistics
In 3D, the algebra of generators of rotation implies that one can reach each state of a multiplet spanning an irreducible representation in an integer number of steps, that is,
$|jm\rangle,\;m=-j,...,+j$ means that $2j$ is integer, so $j$ must be either integer or half-integer.
In 2D, rotations commute, there is no particular algebra and spin $j$ can take arbitrary values.
In 1D, there are no rotations, but there exists "Lorentz spin" $j$ which determines how states Lorentz transform. Thus **in 1 and 2D, not only bosons and fermions are allowed**.

For bosons and fermions, creation and annihilation operators commute or anti-commute, which can be written in general as
$$
a^\dagger_{\phi_i}a^\dagger_{\phi_j}=
(-1)^{2s}a^\dagger_{\phi_j}a^\dagger_{\phi_i},
$$
where $2s\in\mathbb{N}$. If we use field operators being position eigenstates, this can be casted into
$$
\psi^\dagger({\bf x})\psi^\dagger({\bf y})=
e^{i2s\pi}\psi^\dagger({\bf y})\psi^\dagger({\bf x}).
$$
In 1D, if we commute operators on the RHS once more, time we must arrive at the expression consistent with the LHS, meaning that it must be $e^{i2s\pi2}=1$, which implies $2s\in\mathbb{R}$. To preserve $s=j$, where the spin $j\in\mathbb{R}$, one has to change the phase factor such that it changes sign when swapping $x$ and $y$:
$$
\psi^\dagger(x)\psi^\dagger(y)=
e^{i2s\pi\mathrm{sgn}(x-y)}\psi^\dagger(y)\psi^\dagger(x).
$$
To generalise this to 2D, one can use the property:
$$
\arg({\bf y-x})=\arg({\bf x-y})+\pi\,\mathrm{sgn}\left(\pi-\arg({\bf x-y})\right)
$$
and write
$$
\psi^\dagger({\bf x})\psi^\dagger({\bf y})=
e^{i2s\pi\,\mathrm{sgn}\left(\pi-\arg({\bf x-y})\right)}
\psi^\dagger({\bf y})\psi^\dagger({\bf x}).
$$
In 3D, a function generalising $\arg(...)$ is the solid angle $\Omega(C_{\bf y}, {\bf x})$ comprising the point $\bf x$ and a curve $C_{\bf y}$, taken as a circle, centred at $\bf y$ and perpendicular to the $z$ axis in coordinates centred at $\bf x$. One then has
$$
\Omega(C_{\bf y}, {\bf x})=\Omega(C_{\bf x}, {\bf y})
+2\pi\,\mathrm{sgn}\left(2\pi-\Omega(C_{\bf y}, {\bf x})\right).
$$
The corresponding commutation relation is
$$
\psi^\dagger(C_{\bf x})\psi^\dagger(C_{\bf y})=
e^{i2s\pi,\mathrm{sgn}\left(2\pi-\Omega(C_{\bf y}, {\bf x})\right)}
\psi^\dagger(C_{\bf y})\psi^\dagger(C_{\bf x}).
$$
From this, in 3D, only non-local fields can have arbitrary statistics. If the curve $C_{\bf x}$ is shrunk to a point $\bf x$ then the solid angle becomes zero and consistency of the above expression requires again $2s\in\mathbb{R}$.
#### Duality between charge and topological charge
Conserved current in $D=d+1=3$ can be expressed as (for other dimensions there are just other numbers of indices)
$$
J^\mu_4=\epsilon^{\mu\nu\alpha}\partial_\nu B_\alpha,
$$
where $B_\alpha$ is a bosonic vector (in this case) field.
The kinetic Lagrangian density is:
$$
\mathcal{L}=-\frac{1}{4}H_{\mu\nu}H^{\mu\nu},\;\;\;
H_{\mu\nu}=\partial_\mu B_\nu-\partial_\nu B_\mu.
$$
The factor $-1/4$ is $1/2$ in $D=2$ and $1/12$ in $D=4$.

The topological charge is
$$
Q_T=\int d^dxJ^0_D.
$$
Eigenstate of this charge with eigenvalue $a$ is created by the operator
$$
\mu({\bf x},t)=\exp\left(
ia\int_{-\infty}^{\bf x}dz^\mu J^\mu_D({\bf z},t).
\right).
$$
Explicitly for $D=3$,
$$
\mu({\bf x},t)=\exp\left(
ia\int_{-\infty}^{\bf x}d\xi^i \epsilon^{ij}\Pi^j(\xi,t),
\right).
$$
where $\Pi^j({\bf x},t) = H^{0j}({\bf x},t)$ (there is $H^{0ij}$ in $D=4$) is the canonical momentum conjugate to the field $B_\alpha$, obeying the commutation relation 
$$
[B^i({\bf x},t),\Pi^j({\bf y},t)]=i\delta^{ij}\delta^2({\bf x-y})
$$
(in $D=4$ there is $\delta^{ik}\delta^{jl}-\delta^{il}\delta^{jk}$).

In $D=3$ we define a current which corresponds to a string (point particle in $D=2$, membrane in $D=4$):
$$
j^{\mu\nu}({\bf x},L)=\int_{S(L)}d^2\xi\mu^\nu\delta^D({\bf z}-\xi),
$$
The dual operators are constructed by coupling the currents to the field intensity tensors:
$$
\sigma=\exp\left(
ib\int d^Dzj^{\mu_1...\mu_{D-1}}H_{\mu_1...\mu_{D-1}}
\right)
$$
This corresponds to
$$
\sigma(L({\bf x}), t)=\exp\left(
ib\int_{-\infty}^{\bf x}d\xi^iB_i(\xi,t)
\right).
$$
The charge density may be expressed as
$$
\rho({\bf x},t)=\partial_iH^{0i}({\bf x},t)=\partial_i\Pi^i({\bf x},t).
$$
In $D=4$ it will be a vector. Charge is then
$$
Q=\int d^dz\rho({\bf z},t).
$$
One can find also
$$
[Q,\sigma]=b\sigma.
$$
This implies that operators $\sigma$ create eigenstates of charge with eigenvalue $b$. 

In $D=4$ it will create states carrying a unit of magnitude $b$ of the charge $Q^i$ (recall, it will be a vector) along the closed curve $C$, that will correspond to as many units of flux as the number of times the curve $C$ pierces through the membrane, which describes the stae created by the operator.

The composite field is equal
$$
\sigma(L({\bf x}),t)\mu({\bf y},t)=
\exp\left(
iab\int_{-\infty,L}^{\bf x}d\xi^i
\int_{-\infty,L'}^{\bf y}d\eta^k\epsilon^{ki}\delta^2(\xi-\eta)
\right)
\mu({\bf y},t)\sigma(L({\bf x}),t)=
\exp\left(
i\frac{ab}{\pi}\arg(\bf x-y)
\right)
\mu({\bf y},t)\sigma(L({\bf x}),t).
$$
The composite order-disorder operator $\psi({\bf x},t)=\sigma({\bf x},t)\mu({\bf x},t)$ will have the commutation relation corresponding to arbitrary statistics $s=\frac{ab}{2\pi}$. 
In this case $\mu$ creates quantum vortices, in $D=4$ - magnetic monopoles.

We express the fermionic current in terms of a natural bosonic field in $D=3$,
$$
j^\mu=\bar{\psi}\gamma^\mu\psi=K^{\mu\nu}B_\nu.
$$
The fermionic generating functional, which is defined as
$$
Z[J]=Z^{-1}_0\int D\psi D\bar{\psi}\exp\left(
-\int d^Dz\left[
i\bar{\psi}\partial\!\!\!/\psi-\bar{\psi\gamma^\mu\psi J_\mu}
\right]
\right)
=Z_2[J]Z_{N>2}[J],
$$
$$
Z_2[J]=\exp\left(
\frac{1}{2}\int d^DzJ_\mu\Pi^{\mu\nu}_1J_\nu
\right),
$$
where $\Pi^{\mu\nu}_1$ is the one-loop vacuum polarisation tensor, is now written as
$$
Z[J]=Z^{-1}_0\int DB_\mu\exp\left(
-\int d^3z\left[
\frac{1}{2}B_\muA^{\mu\nu}B_\nu+J_\mu K^{\mu\nub_\nu}
\right]
\right).
$$
In this case 
$$
\Pi^{\mu\nu}_1=K^{\mu\alpha}(A^{-1})^{\alpha\beta}K^{\beta\nu}
$$
and the operators $K^{\mu\nu}$ and $A^{\mu\nu}$ are to be determined. The above equation can be solved by
$$
A^{\mu\nu}=K^{\mu\nu}=\Pi^{\mu\nu}_1
$$
Then the bosonisation formulas are (using the vacuum polarisation tensor in $D=3$):
$$
i\bar{\psi}\partial\!\!\!/\psi=
\frac{1}{2}B_\mu\Pi^{\mu\nu}_1B_\nu=
-\frac{1}{4}H_{\mu\nu}\frac{1}{16\square^{1/2}}H^{\mu\nu}+
\theta\epsilon^{\mu\nu\alpha}B_\mu\partial_\nu B_\alpha,
$$
$$
\bar{\psi}\gamma^\mu\psi=
\Pi^{\mu\nu}_1B_\nu=
\theta\epsilon^{\mu\nu\alpha}\partial_\nu B_\alpha+
\frac{1}{32\square^{1/2}}\partial_\nu H^{\mu\nu}.
$$
Using now the representation of Dirac matrices,
$$
\gamma^0=\left(
\begin{matrix}
1 & 0 \\
0 & -1
\end{matrix}
\right),\;\;\;
\gamma^1=\left(
\begin{matrix}
0 & -i \\
-i & 0
\end{matrix}
\right),\;\;\;
\gamma^2=\left(
\begin{matrix}
0 & -1 \\
-1 & 0
\end{matrix}
\right),
$$
and introducing rapidity
$$
k^0=k\cosh\chi,\;\;\;|{\bf k}|=k\sinh\chi,
$$
one can write the Lagrangian in momentum space
$$
\mathcal{L}=\psi^\dagger\gamma^0\gamma^\mu k_\mu\psi=
\psi^\dagger k\left[\mathbb{1}\cosh\chi+\hat{\phi}\cdot\sigma\sinh\chi\right]\psi=
\psi^\dagger T^\dagger T\psi,
$$
where one introduced
$$
T=\mathbb{1}\cosh\frac{\chi}{2}+\hat{\phi}\cdot\sigma\sinh\frac{\chi}{2}.
$$
Next, introducing the new field $\Psi=T\psi$ one has
$$
\mathcal{L}=\psi^\dagger\sigma^\mu k_\mu\psi=
\Psi^\dagger\left(
\begin{matrix}
k & 0 \\ 0 & k
\end{matrix}
\right)\Psi.
$$
The two-point correlation function is now
$$
\langle\Psi\Psi^\dagger\rangle(k)=\mathbb{1}_2\frac{1}{k}
$$
or
$$
\langle\Psi(x)\Psi^\dagger(y)\rangle=\mathbb{1}_2\frac{1}{2\pi^2|x-y|^2}.
$$

To describe field bosonisation, one intrduces dual operators
$$
\mu(x)=\exp\left(
ia\int_{-\infty}^{\bf x}d\xi^\mu\square^{-1/2}\epsilon^{\mu\alpha\beta}
\partial_\alpha B_\beta(\xi)
\right)
$$
and
$$
\sigma(y)=\exp\left(
-ib\int_{-\infty}^{\bf y} d\eta^\mu B_\mu(\xi)
\right).
$$
With that, the correlation functions can be reproduced if one defines the bosonised field
$$
\Psi=\left(\begin{matrix}
\sigma\mu \\ \sigma^\dagger\mu
\end{matrix}\right).
$$
