For the complex phase symmetry of the complex scalar field, the conserved charge is:
$$
j_\mu=-i(\phi^*\partial_\mu\phi-\phi\partial_mu \phi^*)\propto\partial_\mu\alpha.
$$
The total charge is then:
$$
Q=\int d^3x ~j_4.
$$
In the case of this symmetry, **the total charge is the total number of particles**.
We modify the partition function by introducing the chemical potential:
$$
Z=\exp(-\Omega(T,\mu,V))=\exp\left(-\frac{1}{T}(\hat H-\mu\hat N)\right).
$$
$\Omega$ is called grand-canonical potential. It only extensive parameter is $V$, so they must be proportional:
$$
\Omega(T,\mu,V)=-p(T,\mu)V,
$$
where $p$ is pressure.
Adding chemical potential means a new term in the action:
$$
\delta S=\mu\int_0^\beta d\tau\int d^3x~j_4=
\mu\int_0^\beta d\tau\int d^3x~(\phi_2\pi_1-\phi_1\pi_2),
$$
where the field has been split into real and imaginary part, $\phi=(\phi_1+i\phi_2)/\sqrt 2$ and $\pi$ is the conjugate momentum.
When momentum is integrated out, one obtains terms of the type:
$$
\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\partial \phi_1}{\partial\tau}+i\mu\phi_2\right).
$$
Then the chemical potential can be interpreted as $\mu=eA_0$ in the covariant derivative written in minimal coupling.
One can Fourier transform the Lagrangian and diagonalize the resulting matrix to get at the end:
$$
-\log(Z)=V\int\frac{d^3k}{(2\pi)^3}\left[
\beta\omega_k+
\log\left(1-e^{-\beta(\omega_k-\mu)}\right)+
\log\left(1-e^{-\beta(\omega_k+\mu)}\right)
\right].
$$
The total charge is then also:
$$
Q=\frac{\partial\log(Z)}{\partial\mu}=V\int\frac{d^3k}{(2\pi)^3}
\left(
\frac{1}{e^{\beta(\omega_k-\mu)}-1}-
\frac{1}{e^{\beta(\omega_k+\mu)}-1}
\right).
$$
###### Non-relativistic limit
Total charge:
$$
N=Q=V\int\frac{k^3}{(2\pi)^3}\frac{1}{e^{\beta\left(\frac{k^2}{2m}-\mu\right)}-1}.
$$
For the field redefined as
$$
\psi=\frac{\phi}{\sqrt{2mc^2}},
$$
the Green function takes the form:
$$
G=\frac{1}{i\omega_n-\mu+k^2/2m}.
$$
###### Bose-Einstein condensate
Einstein noticed that as $T\rightarrow T_C$, $\mu\rightarrow 0$, and so the particle density is a constant:
$$
n_T=\int\frac{d^3p}{(2\pi^3)}\frac{1}{e^{p^2/2mT}-1}.
$$
If the actual density $n$ is larger, the excess particle will go to the condensate with density $n_0=n-n_T$, where they will occupy the lowest possible state with ${\bf p}=0$. 
We assume an extra wave-function of the condensate with the value:
$$
\psi_0=\sqrt{n_0}.
$$
The "vertex diagrams" with two thermal particles and two condensate particles, can be understood as "mass diagrams", because condensate particles do not carry momentum and thermal particles do not change momentum. The mass term is:
$$
\Sigma=\lambda n_0\left(\begin{matrix}
2 & 1 \\
1 & 2
\end{matrix}\right).
$$
Inverse of the resummed Green function:
$$
G^{-1}=\left(\begin{matrix}
\omega+\lambda n_0+p^2/2m & \lambda n_0 \\
\lambda n_0 & -\omega+\lambda n_0+p^2/2m
\end{matrix}\right)
$$
By inverting the above matrix:
$$
G=\frac{2}{-4\omega^2m^2+4\lambda n_0mp^2+p^4}\left(\begin{matrix}
-2m^2\omega+2\lambda n_0m^2+p^2m & -2\lambda n_0m^2 \\
-2\lambda n_0m^2 & 2m^2\omega+2\lambda n_0m^2+p^2m
\end{matrix}\right).
$$
Poles of the Green function always provide dispersion relations of the excitations of the system that can be produced by a vanishingly small external source.
The poles are:
$$
\omega_\pm(p)=\pm\frac{\sqrt{4\lambda n_0mp^2+p^4}}{2m},
$$
which for high momentum or small condensate gives usual particles. But in the limit ${\bf p}\rightarrow 0$, it is:
$$
\omega_\pm(p)=\pm p\sqrt{\lambda n_0/m},
$$
Which are not particles, but waves - phonons with the speed of sound $v=\sqrt{\lambda n_0.m}$.
We can rewrite the Green function (after analytic continuation to the Minkowski space) as a sum of two poles with their residuals:
$$
G=\frac{u_p^2}{\omega-\omega_++i\delta}+\frac{v_p^2}{\omega-\omega_--i\delta}.
$$
The first term is the emission of **quasiparticles**, second their absorption. Since there must exist something to be aborbed, this implies the existence of quasiparticles with ${\bf p}\neq0$, while at zeroth order the condensate consisted of non-moving particles.
With the explicit form:
$$
v_p^2=\frac{p^2/2m+\lambda n_0}{2\omega_+}-\frac{1}{2},
$$
the condensate renormalization, written as:
$$
n = n_0+\int\frac{d^3p}{(2\pi)^3}v_p^2,
$$
is a finite integral.
WIth the definition of scattering length:
$$
\lambda\equiv\frac{4\pi\hbar^2}{m}a,
$$
the depletion of the condensate equals:
$$
\frac{n-n_0}{n_0}=\frac{8}{3}\left(
\frac{n_0a^3}{\pi}
\right)^{1/2}.
$$