#### Floquet's Theorem
If the potential is invariant under Bravais lattice translations $T({\bf R})$, then the eigenfunctions of energy $\psi({\bf r})$ are also eigenfunctions of this operator, so
$$
T({\bf R})\psi({\bf r})=e^{i{\bf q\cdot R}}\psi({\bf r})
$$
and the generator of translation $\bf q$ is conserved. But like any vector it can be expressed as a sum of a vector in first Brillouin zone and a vector of the reciprocal lattice,
$$
\bf q=k+Q
$$
Then 
$$
T({\bf R})\psi({\bf r})=e^{i{\bf (Q+k)\cdot R}}\psi({\bf r})=
e^{i{\bf k\cdot R}}\psi({\bf r}),
$$
so all the conserved wave vectors belong to the first Brillouin zone.
#### Bloch's Theorem
Energy eigenfunctions in a periodic potential are
$$
\psi({\bf r})=e^{i\bf k\cdot r}u_{\bf k}({\bf r})
$$
where $\bf k$ belongs to the first Brillouin zone and $u_{\bf k}({\bf r})$ has the symmetry of the Bravais lattice. Furthermore, energy is periodic in the reciprocal lattice,
$$
E({\bf k+Q})=E({\bf k}).
$$
This means that momenta differing by $\bf Q$ are physically equivalent. This also means that electrons in the Bravais lattice propagate without scattering.

Scattering (and resistivity) are generated by interaction of electrons with ***phonons***.
#### *Umklapp* mechanism
By the definition of the Wigner-Seitz cell, for any vector ${\bf Q}_0$ from a reciprocal latiice point to one of its neighbours, von Laue conditions is fulfilled by the vectors at the boundaries of the first Brillouin zone:
$$
{\bf k}_i=\frac{{\bf Q}_0}{2},\;{\bf k}_f=-\frac{{\bf Q}_0}{2},\;
{\bf k}_i-{\bf k}_f={\bf Q}_0.
$$
This means that there will be constructive interference for ${\bf k}_i=-{\bf k}_f$ and electron will be scattered back into the first Brillouin zone and cannot escape it.

Because energy is continuous and periodic, it must be bound from above and from below (?) Combining it with the Umklapp mechanism, energy gaps are formed between energy bands. The first energy gap opens at the first Brillouin zone boundary. Other bands are formed in next Brillouin zones.

If the first Brillouin zone is fulle filled, the Umklapp mechanism together with the Pauli principle make the material an isolator, if the zone is not fully filled, the material is metal.

There are $N$ energy levels in each band
#### Tight binding regime
The overlap between electron wave functions at neighboring center is weak, a hopping is small, energy bands are formed by energy levels with the same $n$ quantum number.
The Hamiltonian is
$$
H_{TB}=\epsilon_n\sum_{{\bf R}_i}|n;{\bf R}_i\rangle\langle n;{\bf R}_i|-
	t\sum_{\langle{\bf R}_i,{\bf R}_j\rangle}|n;{\bf R}_i\rangle\langle n;{\bf R}_j|,
$$
where $t$ is the hopping parameter dependent on the overlap and the second sum runs over nearest neighbours.
Electron field operator can be written as
$$
\psi_\sigma({\bf r})=\sum_i\phi({\bf r}-{\bf R}_i)c_{i,\sigma}
$$
Then in the operator formalism:
$$
H_{TB}=\epsilon_n\sum_{i,\sigma}c_{i,\sigma}^\dagger c_{i,\sigma}-
t\sum_{\langle i,j\rangle,\sigma}\left[c_{i,\sigma}^\dagger c_{j,\sigma}
+c_{j,\sigma}^\dagger c_{i,\sigma}\right]
$$
The energy eigenstates are
$$
|n,{\bf k}\rangle=\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}}\sum_{{\bf R}_i}e^{i{\bf k\cdot R}_i}
|n;{\bf R}_i\rangle
$$
and eigenvalues are
$$
E_n({\bf k})=\epsilon_n-t\sum_{{\bf R}_i\in\mathrm{neighbours~of~}{\bf R}}e^{i{\bf k\cdot R}_i}
$$
#### Weak periodic potential or large hopping regime
One can obtain, that at the boundary of the first Brillouin zone (at $\frac{\pi}{a}$ in 1D):
$$
E_\pm(k)=E_0\left(\frac{\pi}{a}\right)\pm\left|V\left(\frac{\pi}{a}\right)\right|,
$$
so the gap of width $2\left|V\left(\frac{\pi}{a}\right)\right|$ opens at the zone boundary (cf. the Umklapp mechanism).

Fermi surface is a surface of constant energy $E({\bf k}) = E_F$, So the gradient of the energy must be perpendicular to the Fermi surface. Near the zone boundary, from the general solution, one has
$$
\nabla_{\bf k}E_\pm({\bf k})=\frac{\hbar^2}{m}\left[{\bf k}-\frac{{\bf Q}_0}{2}\right]
$$
And it can be easily seen that this vector belongs to the zone boundary. So the Fermi surface is always deformed to be perpendicular to the first Brillouin zone boundary when they cross.
#### Coulomb interaction among electrons
In the static case it can be expressed by adding to the free Hamiltonian a term
$$
H_C=e\int d^3r\rho({\bf r})\phi({\bf r})
$$
or, taking into account the Green's function for Laplacian,
$$
H_c=\frac{e^2}{2}\sum_{\sigma,\sigma'}d^3r \,d^3r\,
\psi_\sigma({\bf r})\psi_\sigma^\dagger({\bf r})
\left[\frac{1}{4\pi|{\bf r-r'}|}\right]
\psi_\sigma'({\bf r'})\psi_\sigma'^\dagger({\bf r'})
$$
#### Hubbard model
By neglecting the terms corresponding to nearest neighbour interaction, which is subleading due to fast decay of electron wave functions, one can write:
$$
H_C'=U\sum_in_{i,\uparrow}n_{i,\downarrow}+\frac{U}{2}\sum_{i,\sigma}n_{i,\sigma}
$$
In the frequent case that there is one electron per site, one has
$$
\sum_\sigma n_{i,\sigma}=1
$$
which is called **Gutzwiller projection**. With that, second term of $H_C'$ becomes irrelevant constant.
The Hubbard model Hamiltonian is constructed by adding contributions from all sites, in tight binding regime with half-filling:
$$
H_U=-t\sum_{\langle i,j\rangle,\sigma}
\left[c_{i,\sigma}^\dagger c_{j,\sigma}+c_{j,\sigma}^\dagger c_{i,\sigma}\right]
+U\sum_in_{i,\uparrow}n_{i,\downarrow}
$$
#### Exchange interaction
Another term of the Coulomb interaction, not present in the classical case, is
$$
H_J = J\sum_{\sigma,\sigma'}c^\dagger_{1,\sigma}c_{2,\sigma}
c^\dagger_{2,\sigma}c_{1,\sigma}
$$
The spin density operator is
$$
\rho^i_S({\bf r})=\frac{\hbar}{2}\sum_{\alpha\beta}\psi^\dagger_\alpha({\bf r})
\sigma^i_{\alpha\beta}\psi_\beta({\bf r}).
$$
Integrating over $\bf r$ and inserting electron field operators, one can get
$$
{\bf S}_i=\frac{\hbar}{2}\sum_{\alpha\beta}c^\dagger_{i,\alpha}
\vec{\sigma}_{\alpha\beta}c_{i,\beta}.
$$
One can then write
$$
H_J=-\frac{2J}{\hbar^2}{\bf S}_1\cdot{\bf S}_2+
\frac{2J}{\hbar^2}
\left(\sum_\sigma n_{1,\sigma}\right)
\left(\sum_\sigma n_{2,\sigma}\right).
$$
With the Gutzwiller projection, which now means localised magnetism, the second term becomes an irrelevant constant.
For all sites of the crystal one gets the Heisenberg model:
$$
H_H=-\frac{2J}{\hbar^2}\sum_{ij}{\bf S}_i\cdot{\bf S}_j
$$
It is isotropic, anisotropy can be introduced by spin-orbit interaction, which can be treated perturbatively,
$$
H_{SO} = \lambda\sum_i{\bf L}_i\cdot{\bf S}_i.
$$
For many materials the first order correction energy is zero: $\Delta H_{(1)}=0$, and the second order can be obtained to be:
$$
\Delta H_{(2)}=\sum_{ij}\tilde{J}^{\alpha\beta}{\bf S}^\alpha_i{\bf S}^\beta_j,
$$
where $\tilde{J}^{\alpha\beta}$ is defined by $J^{\alpha\beta}=\tilde{J}\delta^{\alpha\beta}+\tilde{J}^{\alpha\beta}$.
Diagonalising this quadratic form, one gets the $XYZ$ model. For the diagonal form coefficients $J_X=J_Y=0$ this is the **Ising model**, for $J_X=J_Y\neq0$ and $J_Z=0$ it is the $XY$ model, and for $J_X=J_Y=J_Z$ - **Heisenberg model**.