One assumes the free energy
$$
F[{\bf A},\Psi] = F_0 +
\int d^3r\left\lbrace
\frac{1}{2M}\left|\left[
-i\hbar\nabla-\frac{q}{c}{\bf A}
\right]\psi\right|^2 + 
a(T)|\psi|^2+\frac{1}{2}b|\psi|^4
\right\rbrace.
$$
The field equation for the **superconductive condensate (SC)** is
$$
\frac{1}{2M}\left|\left[
-i\hbar\nabla-\frac{q}{c}{\bf A}
\right]\right|^2\psi + 
\left[a(T)+b|\psi|^3\right]\psi=0.
$$
The solution that minimises the free energy is $\Psi=\sqrt{n_s}e^{i\phi}$, where $n_s$ - density of the carriers. and $|\Psi|=\sqrt{\frac{a_0}{b}(T_c-T)}$ for $T<T_c$ and $|\Psi|=0$ for $T>T_c$.
The current can be calculated as
$$
{\bf J}_s^i=\frac{\delta F[{\bf A}]}{\delta {\bf A}_i({\bf r})}.
$$
The velocity eigenstate is then
$$
{\bf v}_s=\frac{1}{M}\left[\hbar\nabla\phi-\frac{q}{c}{\bf A}\right]
$$
and the current
$$
{\bf J}_s=\langle{\bf J}\rangle(t)=qn_s{\bf v}_s =
n_s\frac{q}{M}\left[\hbar\nabla\phi-\frac{q}{c}{\bf A}\right] =
\langle{\bf j}\rangle(t)+\frac{q^2}{Mc}n_s{\bf A}.
$$
It follows:
$$
\langle{\bf j}\rangle(t)=n_s\frac{q}{M}\hbar\nabla\phi.
$$
This component of the current is present even if the external field is removed, when the phase is coherent across the whole sample. 
One can calculate directly
$$
\nabla\times{\bf J}_s=-n_s\frac{q^2}{Mc}{\bf B},
$$
then, inserting the Ampère law,
$$
-\nabla\times\nabla\times{\bf B}=\nabla^2{\bf B}=\frac{4\pi n_sq^2}{Mc^2}{\bf B}.
$$
Alternatively, taking the rotation of both sides,
$$
\nabla^2{\bf J}=\frac{4\pi n_sq^2}{Mc^2}{\bf J}.
$$
The equation for $\bf B$ is solved in the superconductor by
$$
{\bf B}(z)={\bf B}(0)e^{-z/\lambda_L},\; z>0,
$$
where $\lambda_L^2=\frac{Mc^2}{4\pi n_sq^2}\approx10^{-8}~\mathrm{m}$ is the London penetration length. The magnetic field (and the current) are present only in the very narrow skin of the superconductor.
#### Electron-phonon interaction
The interaction Hamiltonian can be written as
$$
H_{el}=\int d^3x\frac{1}{N}\sum_{{\bf R}_i}\rho({\bf x})V({\bf x - X}_i),
$$
where $\rho({\bf x})$ - electron density ${\bf X}_i={\bf R}_i + {\bf r}_i$ - position of the lattice kernels, ${\bf R}_i$ - equilibrium positions (lattice sites). One can Taylor-expand in ${\bf r}_i={\bf r}_i({\bf R}_i)$:
$$
H_{el}=\int d^3x\frac{1}{N}
\sum_{{\bf R}_i}\rho({\bf x})\left[
V({\bf x}-{\bf R}_i) + 
{\bf r}_i({\bf R}_i)\nabla_{{\bf R}_i}V({\bf x}-{\bf R}_i) + ...
\right].
$$
The first term corresponds to electrons in a Bravais lattice and, thanks to $\rho({\bf r})=\sum_\sigma\psi_\sigma^\dagger({\bf r})\psi_\sigma({\bf r})$ can be written as
$$
H_{el}^{(0)}=\sum_{{\bf k},{\bf k'},\sigma}
c_{{\bf k},\sigma}^\dagger c_{{\bf k'},\sigma}
\int d^3x\,e^{i({\bf k}'-{\bf k})\cdot{\bf x}}\frac{1}{N}
\sum_{{\bf R}_i}V({\bf x}-{\bf R}_i).
$$
The integral in this equation is a Fourier transform of a function with Bravais lattice symmetry, so the vector ${\bf k}'-{\bf k}={\bf Q}$ must belong to the reciprocal lattice, therefore
$$
H_{el}^{(0)}=\sum_{{\bf k},\sigma}
c_{{\bf k},\sigma}^\dagger c_{{\bf k+Q},\sigma}V({\bf Q}).
$$
From the Bloch theorem ($E({\bf k})=E({\bf k+Q})$) energy (and physical momentum) are the same after the scattering as they were before, so the electron simply does not scatter on the Bravais lattice.

The first order term
$$
H_{e]}^{(1)}=\frac{1}{\sqrt N}
\sum_{{\bf k},{\bf k'},{\bf q},s,\sigma}
c_{{\bf k},\sigma}^\dagger c_{{\bf k'},\sigma}
\frac{1}{N} \sum_{{\bf R}_i}
e^{i({\bf k}'-{\bf k+q})\cdot{\bf R}_i}
\sqrt{\frac{\hbar}{2M\omega_s({\bf q})}}
\left[a_s({\bf q})+a_s^\dagger({\bf -q})\right]
\int d^3x\,e^{i({\bf k}'-{\bf k})\cdot{\bf x}}
{\bf e}_s \cdot \nabla_{{\bf R}_i}V({\bf x}-{\bf R}_i),
$$
where the lattice displacement was expressed in terms of phonon creation and annihilation operators.
One can use the fact that
$$
\int d^3x\,e^{i({\bf k}'-{\bf k})\cdot{\bf x}}
\nabla_{{\bf R}_i}V({\bf x}-{\bf R}_i) = 
\int d^3x\,e^{-i({\bf k}'-{\bf k})\cdot{\bf x+R}_i}
\nabla_{{\bf x}}V({\bf x})
$$
and the periodicity of $\nabla_{{\bf x}}V({\bf x})$ which also here implies that also here ${\bf k}'-{\bf k}={\bf Q}$ belongs to the reciprocal lattice to write that the ${\bf R}_i$-sum reduces to:
$$
\sum_{{\bf R}_i}
e^{i({\bf k}'-{\bf k+q-Q})\cdot{\bf R}_i} = 
N\delta_{{\bf k}'-{\bf k+q},{\bf Q}}.
$$
Thus the electron-phonon interaction Hamiltonian is
$$
H_{e-ph]}=
\sum_{{\bf k},{\bf q},s,\sigma} W_{{\bf q},s}
c_{{\bf k+q},\sigma}^\dagger c_{{\bf k},\sigma}
\left[a_s({\bf q})+a_s^\dagger({\bf -q})\right],
$$where
$$
W_{{\bf q},s}=\sqrt{\frac{\hbar}{2MN\omega_s({\bf q})}}
\int d^3x\,e^{-i{\bf q}\cdot{\bf x}}
{\bf e}_s\cdot\nabla_{{\bf x}}V({\bf x}).
$$
By treating this Hamiltonian as a perturbation in a full Hamiltonian, the first-order correction to energy is zero, and the second term gives effective between electrons through exchange of a phonon.
One has to write a Hamiltonian which gives the same energy as the second-order energy correction and then expresses it using some potential.
This potential will then have the form
$$
V({\bf k},{\bf k})=|W_{\bf q}|^2\left[
\frac{\hbar\omega}{(\epsilon_{\bf k}-\epsilon_{\bf k-q})^2-(\hbar\omega)^2}
\right]
$$
Debye frequency is a maximum frequency, so if $\Delta\epsilon>\hbar\omega_D$, this potential is never attractive. Below it can be attractive for some range of phonon frequencies. At low temperature, most of electrons are below the Fermi surface, and there is a high density of them close to the surface. So the condition will be often fulfilled. This attraction will be more important than the Coulomb repulsion and **Cooper pairs** will be formed.
The pairs form an incompressible fluid, which is described by a complex order parameter of constant modulus. As seen above, this corresponds to the appearance of superconductivity.
#### Type II superconductors
The current in the bulk of a superconductor vanishes:
$$
\hbar\nabla\phi-\frac{q}{c}{\bf A}=0.
$$
Integrating over some closed loop:
$$
\oint_C{\bf A}\cdot d{\bf l}=
\frac{\hbar c}{q}\frac{1}{2\pi}\oint_Cd{\bf l}\cdot\nabla\phi.
$$
The left-hand side is the magnetic flux through the surface spanned by $C$. The Cooper pair wave-function must be single-values, so (if the integration contour is parametrised by some $\tau\in[0,1)$)
$$
\phi(1)-\phi(0)=2\pi n,\;n\in\mathbb{Z}.
$$
Thus the magnetic flux is quantised,
$$
\Phi=n\Phi_0,\;\Phi_0=\frac{\hbar c}{q}.
$$
Choosing the phase of the Cooper pair wave function such that
$$
\Psi({\bf r})=\rho({\bf r})e^{i\phi({\bf r})}=\rho({\bf r})e^{i\arg({\bf r})}
$$
we have the function $\arg({\bf r})$ not well defined at ${\bf r}=0$, so it must hold $\rho(0)=0$, there is a hole of a normal matter inside a superconductor and the magnetic field can pierce through each of such holes. The class of superconductors in which such magnetic vortices exist are called type II superconductors.