Generating functional for Green functions:
$$
Z[J]=\langle0|T\exp\left\lbrace
i\int d^4x\,\phi(x)J(x)
\right\rbrace|0\rangle,
$$
then
$$
\langle0|T\phi(x_1)...\phi(x_n)|0\rangle=\left.\frac{\delta^nZ[J]}
{i^n\delta J(x_1)...\delta J(x_n)}\right|_{J=0}.
$$
Connected Green function generating functional:
$$
W[J]=-i\ln Z[J].
$$
One can define:
$$
\phi_C(x)=\langle0|\phi(x)|0\rangle_C=\frac{\delta W[J]}{\delta J(x)}.
$$
**Effective action** is defined as a a **Legendre transform**,
$$
\Gamma[\phi_C]=W[J]-\int d^4x\,J(x)\phi_C(x).
$$
$\phi_C$ is the value of the field compatible with the source $J$, for which the effective action attains supremum.
Effective action is a generating functional for **proper vertices**,
$$
\Gamma^{(n)}(x_1,...,x_n)=\left.\frac{\delta^n\Gamma[\phi_C]}{\delta\phi_C(x_1)...\delta\phi_C(x_n)}\right|_{\phi_C=0}.
$$
Thus, effective action can be Taylor-expanded in terms of proper vertices. If $\phi_C$ is constant, then:
$$
\Gamma[\phi_C]=\sum_{n=0}^\infty\frac{1}{n!}\int dx^4_1...dx^4_n
\Gamma^{(n)}(x_1,...,x_n)\psi^n_C.
$$
But the integrals are just Fourier transform at zero four-momentum, so the functional becomes a function of $\phi_C$ called **effective potential** and given by
$$
V_\mathrm{eff}(\phi_C)=\sum_{n=0}^\infty\frac{1}{n!}
\Gamma^{(n)}(p_1=0,...,p_n=0)\psi^n_C.
$$
One can calculate:
$$
\frac{\delta\Gamma[\phi_C]}{\delta\phi_C(x)}=-\int_y
\frac{\delta W[J]}{\delta J(y)}\frac{\delta J(y)}{\delta\phi_C(x)}+
\int_y\frac{\delta J(y)}{\delta\phi_C(x)}\phi_C(y)+J(x)=J(x).
$$
Form this. making in the definition of the generating functional the change of integration variable $\phi(x)\rightarrow\phi(x)+\phi_C(x)$, we get
$$
e^{\Gamma[\phi_C]}=\int_\Lambda\mathcal{D}\phi\exp\left(
-S[\phi+\phi_C]+\int\frac{\delta\Gamma[\phi_C]}{\delta\phi_C}\phi
\right),
$$
where $\Lambda$ is an ultraviolet cutoff (for example, due to lattice separation.)

One can define IR-regulated functional:
$$
e^{W_k[J]=}\equiv Z_k[J]:=\exp\left(
-\Delta S_k\left[\frac{\delta}{\delta J}\right]
\right)
Z[J]=
\int_\Lambda\mathcal{D}\phi e^{-S[\phi]-\Delta S_k[\phi]+\int J\phi},
$$
where
$$
\Delta S_k[\phi]=\frac{1}{2}\int\frac{d^Dq}{(2\pi)^D}
\phi(-q)R_k(q)\phi(q).
$$
With this, one can define the interpolating effective action:
$$
F_k[\phi]=\int J\phi-W_k[J]-\Delta S_k[\phi],
$$
where, again, supremum with respect to $J$ should be attained. Now,
$$
\frac{\delta\Gamma[\phi_C]}{\delta\phi_C(x)}+(R_k\phi_C)(x)=J(x).
$$
The regulator function $R_k(q)$ should satisfy:
$$
\begin{eqnarray}
\lim_{q^2/k^2\rightarrow0}R_k(q)>0, \\
\lim_{k^2/q^2\rightarrow0}R_k(q)=0, \\
\lim_{k\rightarrow\Lambda\rightarrow\infty}R_k(q)=\infty.
\end{eqnarray}
$$
This will allow to achieve:
$$
\Gamma_{k\rightarrow\Lambda}\approx S_\mathrm{bare},\;\;\;
\Gamma_{k\rightarrow0}=\Gamma.
$$
Often, one uses:
$$
R_k(p)=p^2r(p^2/k^2).
$$
With the notation:
$$
	t=\ln(k/\Lambda),\;\;\;\partial_t=k\frac{d}{dk}
$$
one can calculate:
$$
\partial_tW_k[J]=-\frac{1}{2}\int\frac{d^Dq}{(2\pi)^D}\partial_tR_k(q)G_k(q)+\partial_t\Delta S_k[\phi],
$$
where $G_k(q)$ is the *connected* propagator.
On the other had, one can obtain (in operator notation):
$$
\mathbb{1}=(\Gamma^{(2)}_k[\phi]+R_k)G_k,
$$
where the notation was introduced
$$
\Gamma^{(n)}_k[\phi]=\frac{\delta^n\Gamma_k[\phi]}{\delta\phi...\delta\phi}.
$$
Putting all together, the **RG flow equation** for $\Gamma_k$ is:
$$
\partial_t\Gamma_k[\phi]=\frac{1}{2}\mathrm{Tr}\left[
\partial_tR_k\left(
\Gamma^{(2)}_k[\phi]+R_k
\right)^{-1}
\right].
$$
#### Schwinger-Dyson equation
Connected two-point function is the Green function of the proper vertex $\Gamma^{(2)}$:
$$
G^{(2)}_C(p)=\frac{i}{\Gamma^{(2)}(p)}.
$$
One can write exact two-point vertex function as
$$
\Gamma^{(2)}(p)=\Gamma^{(2)}_0(p)+\Sigma(p)=p^2-m^2+\Sigma(p),
$$
where $\Sigma(p)$ is called the **self-energy**. The Schwinger-Dyson equation is then written as
$$
\left[G^{(2)}_C(p)\right]^{-1}=\left[G^{(2)}_{0,C}(p)\right]^{-1}+i\Sigma(p).
$$
Or the exact two-point Green function:
$$
G^{(2)}_C(p)=\frac{i}{p^2-m^2-\Sigma(p)}=
G^{(2)}_{0,C}(p)\left[\frac{1}{1+i\Sigma(p)G^{(2)}_{0,C}(p)}\right]=
G^{(2)}_{0,C}(p)+G^{(2)}_{0,C}(p)[-i\Sigma(p)]G^{(2)}_{0,C}(p)+...
$$
This leads to the diagram formalism.
#### Current-current correlation function in QED
It is given by:
$$
\langle j^\mu j^\nu\rangle_C=\Pi^{\mu\nu},
$$
where $\Pi^{\mu\nu}$ is the vacuum polarisation tensor, which is the photon self-energy.
In D=2:
$$
\Pi^{\mu\nu}_1=\frac{k^2\delta^{\mu\nu}-k^\mu k^\nu}{\pi k^2},
$$
In D=3:
$$
\Pi^{\mu\nu}(p)=\frac{p^2\delta^{\mu\nu}-p^\mu p^\nu}{16\sqrt{p^2}}+
\theta\epsilon^{\mu\nu\alpha}p_\alpha.
$$

