The exact two-point Green function is
$$
G^{(2)}_C({\bf x}, t)=i\int\frac{d\omega}{2\pi}\int\frac{d^3k}{(2\pi)^3}
\frac{e^{i({\bf k\cdot x} -\omega t)}}
{\omega^2-[{\bf k}^2+m^2+\Sigma(\omega,{\bf k})]+i\epsilon}.
$$
There are theories asymptotically free at large (like QED) or small distance (like QCD). Now we consider the first case.
By the Riemann-Lebesgue theorem, only zeros of the vertex function contribute to this integral at large distance.
Expanding the self-energy in the Taylor series around some renormalised mass $m_R$:
$$
\Sigma(p)=\Sigma(p^2=m_R^2)+(p^2-m_R^2)
\left.\frac{\partial\Sigma}{\partial p}\right|_{p^2=m_R^2}+...
$$
One can define the renormalised mass as:
$$
m^2_R=m^2+\Sigma(p^2=m_R^2).
$$
Then the two-point function takes the form:
$$
G^{(2)}_C({\bf x}, t)=i\int\frac{d\omega}{2\pi}\int\frac{d^3k}{(2\pi)^3}
\frac{e^{i({\bf k\cdot x} -\omega t)}}
{(p^2-m^2_R)\left[1-\left.\frac{\partial\Sigma}{\partial p}\right|_{p^2=m^2_R} \right]+...}.
$$
When defining also the renormalised fields:
$$
\phi_R=Z^{-1/2}\phi,\;\;\;Z=\frac{1}
{1-\left.\frac{\partial\Sigma}{\partial p}\right|_{p^2=m^2_R} },
$$
one can see that the renormalzied two-point function becomes:
$$
G^{(2)}_C({\bf x}, t)_R=i\int\frac{d\omega}{2\pi}\int\frac{d^3k}{(2\pi)^3}
\frac{e^{i({\bf k\cdot x} -\omega t)}}
{(p^2-m^2_R)\left[1+\mathcal{O}(p^2-m^2_R)\right]}.
$$
This has poles at the renormalised mass $m_R$ with the same residues as the Green function for the free field. If the large-distance interacting theory behaves like the free one, it can be concluded that $m_R$ coincides with the physical mass in the interacting theory. 
The mass and field renormalisations can be summarised with the conditions
$$
\left.\Gamma^{(2)}_R(p^2)\right|_{p^2=m^2_R}=0,\;\;\;
\frac{\partial}{\partial p^2}\left.\Gamma^{(2)}_R(p^2)\right|_{p^2=m^2_R}=1.
$$
Similarly, one can define a physical coupling parameter. For example, with the potental
$$
V(\phi)=\frac{\lambda}{4!}\phi^4.
$$
One has
$$
\left.\Gamma^{(4)}_R(p_i)\right|_{p^2_i=m^2_R}=\lambda_R.
$$
The appearance of physical values of different quantities is not driven by any "divergences", but just by the presence of interactions. But renormalisation is a good opportunity, to put infinities under the carpet of unphysical, unrenormalised quantities.
#### Renormalisation group equations
For proper vertices, for example, the renormalisation procedure can be summarised as
$$
\Gamma^{(n)}_R(p_1,...,p_n,m_R,\lambda_R)=
Z^{n/2}(m_R)\Gamma^{(n)}(p_1,...,p_n,m,\lambda)
$$
with the above conditions on this quantity and its derivative(s) at the energy scale $m_R$.
Performing a finite renormalisation at a different scale $\mu$:
$$
\Gamma^{(n)}_R(p_1,...,p_n,m_R(\mu),\lambda_R(\mu))=
Z^{n/2}(m_R)\Gamma^{(n)}(p_1,...,p_n,m,\lambda)
$$
one has corresponding conditions:
$$
\left.\Gamma^{(2)}_R(p^2)\right|_{p^2=\mu^2}=\mu^2-m^2_R,\;\;\;
\frac{\partial}{\partial p^2}
\left.\Gamma^{(2)}_R(p^2)\right|_{p^2=\mu^2}=1,\;\;\;
\left.\Gamma^{(4)}_R(p^2)\right|_{p^2=\mu^2}=\lambda_R.
$$
The two prescriptions are connected by:
$$
\Gamma^{(n)}_R(p_1,...,p_n,m_R(\mu),\lambda_R(\mu))=
\zeta(\mu)^{n/2}\Gamma^{(n)}_R(p_1,...,p_n,m_R,\lambda_R),
$$
where $\zeta(\mu)=Z(\mu)/Z(m_R)$.
One can study how the proper vertices (or n-point functions) change under renormalisation by finite amounts. The renormalised, physical proper vertices should be invariant, their modification should be balanced by modifications of parameters. The general differential can be written as
$$
\left[
\mu^2\frac{\partial}{\partial\mu^2} +
\beta(\lambda_R)\frac{\partial}{\partial\lambda_R}-n\gamma
+\gamma_mm^2_R\frac{\partial}{\partial m^2_R}
\right]
\Gamma^{(n)}_R(p^2_i,m_R,\lambda_R)=0,
$$
where
$$
\beta(\lambda_R)=\mu^2\frac{\partial\lambda_R}{\partial\mu^2},\;\;\;
\gamma=\frac{1}{2}\mu^2\frac{\partial}{\partial\mu^2}\ln Z(\mu^2),\;\;\;
\gamma_m=\mu^2\frac{\partial}{\partial\mu^2}\ln m^2_R(\mu^2).
$$
The latter equations serve as renormalisation group equations for a given theory. For example, the sign of the $\beta$ function determines the asymptotic freedom.