Symmetry operation by definition leaves the action invariant. It may transform a classical field like
$$
\phi_i\rightarrow\phi_i'=g_{ij}\phi_j.
$$
On a quantum level, where $\phi$ is an operator, Wigner theorem states that the symmetry is realised by a similarity transformation with unitary or anti-unitary operator:
$$
\phi_i\rightarrow\phi_i'=g_{ij}\phi_j=U\phi_iU^\dagger.
$$
In the unitary case, for a continuous symmetry, one can write
$$
U=\exp(i\omega^aG^a),
$$
where $\omega^a$ are continuous parameters and $G^a$. Hamiltonian must be left invariant, so the unitary operator must commute with it:
$$
UHU^\dagger=H\Rightarrow[H,U]=0.
$$
Therefore also:
$$
[H,G^a]=0,
$$
so generators correspond to **conserved quantities**. They are volume integrals of zeroth components of some conserved currents $j^\mu_a$.

Suppose there are linearly independent eigenstates corresponding to a $g_n$-fold degenerate energy $E_n$, $|n, i\rangle,\,i=1,...,n$. Since $U$ commutes with $H$, $U|n, i\rangle,\,i=1,...,n$ is also an eigenstate corresponding to the same energy, so it can be expressed as a linear combination:
$$
U|n, i\rangle=\sum_{j=1}^{g_n}\mathcal{R}^{(n)}_{ij}|n, j\rangle.
$$
The matrices $\mathcal{R}^{(n)}_{ij}$ form an irreducible representation of dimension $g_n$ of operator $U$, that is:
$$
\mathcal{R}^{(n)}_{ij}=\langle n,j|U|n,i\rangle.
$$
One may write
$$
\mathcal{R}^{(n)}_{ij}=exp[i\omega^aT^a]_{ij},
$$
where the matrix $T^a_{ij}$ is the corresponding irreducible representation of the generator $G^a$:
$$
T^a_{ij}=\langle n,j|G^a|n,i\rangle.
$$

#### Spontaneous symmetry breaking
As a prototype example, an NH$_3$ molecule has a tetrahedron shape with N above or below the plane containing a triangle formed by three H atoms. The system is symmetric under reflections with respect to its plane. There might be two ground states, which are connected by the symmetry operation, but themselves break the symmetry, with N above or below. But in fact, the N atom can tunnel through the plane with amplitude $\gamma$,, so the degenreracy is broken into two states:
$$
|S\rangle=\frac{1}{\sqrt 2}(|+a\rangle+|-a\rangle),\;\;\;E_S=E_n(1-\gamma),
$$
$$
|A\rangle=\frac{1}{\sqrt 2}(|+a\rangle-|-a\rangle),\;\;\;E_S=E_n(1+\gamma).
$$
The true ground state is unique and it shares the symmetry of the Hamiltonian.

Consider the vacuum expectation value of some operator (cf. quark condensate):
$$
\langle\phi_i\rangle=\langle0|\phi_i|0\rangle.
$$
If system has a unitary symmetry, then
$$
\langle0|\phi_i|0\rangle=\langle0|U^\dagger U\phi_iU^\dagger U|0\rangle=
g_{ij}\langle0|U^\dagger\phi_jU|0\rangle.
$$
If vacuum is invariant under the symmetry operation, $U|0\rangle=|0\rangle$,
$$
\langle0|\phi_i|0\rangle=
g_{ij}\langle0|\phi_j|0\rangle,
$$
$$
[\delta_{ij}-g_{ij}]\langle0|\phi_j|0\rangle=0.
$$
Therefore, if the operation is not trivial, then $\langle\phi_j\rangle=0$.
Conversely, if the vacuum expectation value does not vanish, the vacuum is not invariant under the symmetry operation. $\langle\phi_i\rangle$ can thus serve as an order parameter, which quantifies haw much the vacuum (ground state) would change under the symmetry operation. Compare to the Heisenberg model. In unordered state (paramagnatic, high $T$), the ground state does not change under rotation, in ordered state (ferromagnetic, low $T$), the ground state clearly changes under the rotation.

For the stability of the action of interacting system, the the field has to be shifted:
$$
\phi_i\rightarrow\phi_i'=\phi_i=\langle\phi_i\rangle.
$$
But then the original symmetry $\phi_i\rightarrow g_{ij}\phi_j$ is then lost.

When the symmetry is not broken,
$$
U|0\rangle=\exp(i\omega^aG^a)|0\rangle\LeftrightarrowG^0|0\rangle=0.
$$
Conversely, if the symmetry is broken,
$$
G^0|0\rangle=|G^a\rangle\neq0.
$$
Since $[H,G^a]=0$, 
$$
H|G^a\rangle=G^aH|0\rangle=E_0|G^a\rangle.
$$
So the states obtained by acting on vacuum with the generator $G^a$ are degenerate with vacuum, I a relativistic theory this means that they are massless. They are **Goldstone bosons.**

An example of the potential which is invariant under certain symmetry, but the ground state is not is:
$$
V(\phi)=a(T)[\phi\phi]+\frac{\lambda}{2}[\phi_i\phi_i]^2,
$$
where $a(T) = a\cdot(T-T_C)$. It is invariant under SO(N) symmetry $\phi\rightarrow g_{ij}\phi_j$. The minimum is determined by the equation
$$
\frac{\partial V}{\partial\phi_i}=\left\lbrace
a(T) + \lambda[\phi_i\phi_i]
\right\rbrace\phi_i=0.
$$
For $T>T_C$ the expression in brackets is always positive, so there must be $\phi_i=0$. For $T<T_C$ there are additional minima at
$$
[\phi_i\phi_i]=\frac{|a(T)|}{\lambda}\neq0.
$$
This is **static symmetry breaking**.

###### Dynamic symmetry breaking
It occurs when the classical potential has only a trivial minimum, nontrivial minima are generated by interactions, ususally with other field. For a real scalar field coupled to Dirac fermion in 1+1D
$$
\mathcal{L}=i\bar{\psi} \partial\!\!\!/ \psi + 
g\bar{\psi}\psi\phi - 
\frac{1}{2}\phi^2,
$$
where $\gamma^0=\sigma_x$, $\gamma^1=i\sigma_y$, $\gamma^5=\gamma^0\gamma^1=-\sigma_z$, $\bar{\psi}=\phi^\dagger\gamma^0$.
There is a discrete symmetry:
$$
\psi\rightarrow\gamma^5\psi,
$$
$$
\phi\rightarrow-\phi.
$$
Classical minima of the potential are at:
$$
g\bar{\psi}\psi=\phi,
$$
$$
\psi\phi=0.
$$
There is no spontaneous symmetry breaking at this stage.
The integral over the fermionic field:
$$
e^{iS[\phi]}=\frac{1}{\mathcal{N}}
\int D\psi D\bar{\psi}\exp\left\lbrace
i\int d^2x\left[
\bar{\psi}[i\partial\!\!\!/+g\phi]\psi-\frac{1}{2}\phi^2
\right]
\right\rbrace.
$$
This yields an effective action, which can be calculated to be
$$
S[\phi]=\int d^2x\left[
-\left(\frac{g^2}{4\pi}+\frac{1}{2}\right)\phi^2 + 
\frac{g^2}{4\pi}\phi^2\ln\frac{\phi^2}{\phi^2_0}
\right].
$$
The minima of the potential occur at
$$
\phi_\pm=\pm\phi_0\exp\left(\frac{\pi}{g^2}\right).
$$
Which is not invariant under the symmetry transformation, so the symmetry is spontaneously broken dynamically.
